6.2 Medical Nutrition Therapy (MNT) 16
hyperglycaemia with disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism
they tend to have higher total body fat, visceral fat, insulin resistance and prevalence
w birth  weight – thin  fat
visceral fat
style with focus on increased physical activity and a proper balanced diet in addition
including a healthy diet, adequate exercise and weight control in order to prevent
control of diabetes with the help of diet, physical activity, life style modification and
haemoglobin (HbA1c) is also recommended for screening; however, in India there are
glucose ≥ 200 mg/dl (Casual means without regard to time of last meal)
* Individuals with random plasma glucose between 140-199mg/dl are recommended to  undergo OGTT
zPerson to be tested should be on a normal diet (with at least 200 g carbohydrate/
<70mg/dl is recommended
Urine glucose monitoring is not recommended.  Urine examination for estimation of
zUrine — protein/albumin, micro-albuminuria if available or at least Urinary
zDiet/ exercise to be reinforced
zTo improve health through optimum nutrition
zTo individualise the diet according  to complications and co-morbidities
6.2 Medical Nutrition Therapy (MNT) for diabetes mellitus requires application of
nutritional and behavioral sciences along with physical activity .
zNutritional assessment which includes metabolic, nutritional and life style
zNutritional Intervention, including nutrition education – individualized meal
(BMI) and cultural factors, the diet is planned. The diet should be individualized, close
to the family pattern, flexible, should have variety and meal timing should be according
6.2.1 Dietary Recommendations:
active patient with diabetes. The change in the daily calorie should be a gradual
process, and not more than 500 calories/day.
(ii) Energy or Calorie Distribution:
(a) Carbohydrates:
Evidence is inconclusive for an ideal amount of carbohydrate intake for people
with diabetes. 55-60 % of energy from carbohydrates is an ideal recommendation.
Carbohydrates should be complex in nature. Although different carbohydrates produce
carbohydrate. It is recommended that carbohydrates from foods high in fibre e.g.
whole grains (unpolished cereals and millets), legumes, peas, beans, oats, barley
and some fruits with low glycemic index and glycemic load are consumed. All patients
with diabetes should be encouraged to take 6 small meals a day. Food exchange
system can be followed to give more variety and individualization to the diet plan.
Traditional Indian diets that include whole grains along with whole pulses like
grams, soy, green leafy vegetables and some fruits is the recommendation. Fruits like
juices are best avoided.
(b) Proteins:
Proteins should provide 12-15 % of the total energy intake for people with diabetes –
Proteins from vegetable sources like pulses, soy, grams, peas as well as form low
fat milk, low fat curds, fish and lean meats are recommended.
Supplementation of foods like cereal and pulse (4:1 ratio) can improve the protein
(c) Fats:
Fats should provide 20-30 % of total energy intake for people with diabetes.
Evidence is inconclusive for an ideal amount of total fat intake for people with
diabetes, therefore, goals should be individualized. Fat quality is as important as the
Fat quality
zSaturated fats (SFA) ≤10% energy and 7% in those with raised blood lipid
zPolyunsaturated fats (PUFA) 10 % energy, n6: 3-7% energy, n3: >1% energy,
zMonounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) 10-15% energy + any calories left from
the carbohydrate portion
zTrans fats < 1% energy – preferably totally avoided
benefit glycemic control and CVD risk factors. This can therefore be recommended
as an effective alternative to a lower-fat, higher-carbohydrate eating pattern. Use of
of mixed oils or alternating of oils is recommended.
Sodium intake recommendations for people with diabetes are the same as that for
with hypertension and diabetes, the intake should be reduced to less than 3 g/ day.
is required. All preserved and processed foods such as pickles, chutneys, packaged
It is best to avoid alcohol, however if used, should be taken in moderation. If alcohol
is consumed, it should not be counted as part of the meal plan. However, it should be
borne in mind that alcohol does provide calories (7 kcal/ g), which are considered as
“empty calories”. In the fasting state, alcohol may produce hypoglycaemia. Alcohol
can further exacerbate fatty liver, neuropathy, dyslipidaemia, obesity and also worsen
these are best avoided.
and are best avoided in pregnancy.
6.2.2 Dietary modifications in the presence of complications of diabetes:
(a) Protein : The recommended protein intake for diabetic nephropathy patients is
0.6 g/kg of the ideal body weight plus 24 hour urinary protein loss, if this is significant.
However, it is recommended that the protein intake should not be less than 40 g/
day. For patients with increased creatinine, protein restriction should be advised in
(a) Maintaining an optimal body weight and restricting salt.  Use of fruits and
vegetables should be encouraged, with good quality fats in moderation.
(b) Dyslipidaemia :  Saturated and trans fats food sources like vanaspati,  butter,
milk and its products should be restricted. Use of healthy oils and fibre rich foods is
recommended. Vegetarians can take flax seeds (10 g / day) in their diet as both fish
and flax seeds are rich in omega-3 fatty acids which is protective for heart disease.
Alcohol restriction will bring down the triglycerides. Dietary management should be
6.2.3 Special situations requiring dietary modification:
In the event of fever or other illness, the diabetic diet should be modified by
changing the consistency and texture of foods to maintain adequate calorie intake.
Semi solid foods and fluids or items like thin soups, milk, buttermilk, or fresh lime juice
People with diabetes need an extra quick acting carbohydrate snack before the
exercise and during the exercise, if the exercise period extends the daily-recommended
management, such as glycemic control, lipids, and body fat content. Other suggested
recommended starting daily dose is 500 mg after meals, which may be increased by
recommended as the first line treatment in type 2 diabetes. Metformin has a favorable
after meals with slow titration of doses and with the use of sustained release
are preferably given 15 to 30 minutes before meals. They can be combined with all
zNon-compliance to diet and exercise
insulinotropic peptide (GIP) secreted from the gut in response to a meal. Increase in
zSaxagliptin should be avoided in cardiac failure
zUse with caution in elderly and avoid use as first-line agent
They have to be administered with each meal.
at any one meal and then increased to the maximum tolerable dose.  They must be
lifestyle choices such as increasing physical activity and modification of diet. In some
zExcess agitation should be avoided to prevent loss of potency, clumping,
up and injected into the vial to avoid creating a vacuum
angle to avoid intramuscular injection, especially in the thigh area
lipoatrophy. Rotating within one area is recommended (e.g. rotating injections
zThe most commonly recommended interval between injection of short acting
(regular) / premixed insulin and a meal is 30 min. However, insulin analogues
can be given along with or even after a meal
Figure 7.7  Recommended sites for insulin injection
zOlder persons need careful monitoring to avoid hypoglycaemia
insulinotropic peptide  (GIP) are secreted from the gut in response to a meal and bring
proteins and amino
zAlcohol intake
zDietary habits
8.4.2 Management of albuminuria /proteinuria:
albuminuria / proteinuria in a person with diabetes.
zPatient has nephrotic range proteinuria
zProteinuria is present in absence of retinopathy
zAny patient with pregestational diabetes or GDM with proteinuria
Figure. 8.1  shows a suggested algorithm for the evaluation of proteinuria in a patient
with diabetes. This will help differentiate proteinuria of diabetic and non-diabetic
Figure 8.1: Algorithm for evaluation of non-diabetic proteinuria
zAlways exclude other causes of neuropathy for example nutritional deficiency,
zParaproteinemias (if possible )
zOptimisation of nutritional status, anaemia and pre-pregnancy weight should
Exercise and medical nutritional therapy is the first step and initiated in all women
reduction, dietary modification by reducing salt intake and stress management (if
In patients with diabetic renal disease, even lower BP targets are recommended.
2.2   Lifestyle modification, including information on healthy dietary practices and
agents are best avoided.